----------------------- REVIEW 1 ---------------------
PAPER: 10
TITLE: First steps towards a formalization of Forcing
AUTHORS: Emmanuel Gunther, Miguel Pagano and Pedro Sánchez Terraf

Overall evaluation: 1 (weak accept)

----------- Overall evaluation -----------

This paper reports on an ongoing work aiming at formalizing Cohen's
technique of forcing, a technique used to show results as e.g., the
independence of the continuum hypothesis. Relaying on previous
developments by L. Paulson (formalizing in Isabelle ZF set theory),
the authors outline the procedures needed to mechanize the needed
definitions of forcing, the principle of Dependent Choices, the
Rasiowa-Sikorski lemma (existence of generic filters) and proving the
fundamental theorem relating M and its extension M[G].

The authors first define genericity to show how to extend countable
transitive models of ZFC. Before proving the Rasiowa-Sikorski lemma,
it is needed to formalize the Axiom of Choice (Principle of Dependent
Choices). For that, the authors mechanized a particular proof due to
Moschovakis. The proof that M is contained in its extension M[G]
relies on a naming function "check". Apparently, there are a still
some technical problems not yet addressed about this function. Then a
forcing relation is defined to relate satisfaction in M and in its
extension M[G]. Furthermore, the authors formalize the Pairing Axiom
that does not require the forcing relation but it illustrates the
technique of names used to prove the previous results.

Pros: The authors did a good job in introducing the needed
mathematical concepts and then introducing the machinery needed in
Isabelle to complete the proofs. As a short paper and preliminary
work, I think it deserves to be presented at the conference.

Cons:
- It is difficult to assess the effort needed to complete the
proofs. The authors only highlighted some proofs that were finished by
"auto". However, the source files available at the authors' webpage
show that this effort is reasonable for an ongoing work.
- The paper should provide general sketches of the proofs and give
  some more information about the formalization (lines of code, number
  of theorems, theorems proved automatically, etc).
- Finally, some intuitions and explanations are missing in Section 4
  in order to better understand the developments.


Minor Details
- Abstract: M satisfy -> satisfies 
ya estaba

- I'm not an expert in set theory but I found curios the term
  "coordinable". Do you mean "countable" (it appears several times in
  the paper). In fact, Def 1.1, item (ii) seems to show that
  coordinable with N means countable.

R is not coordinable with the natural numbers (i.e., there is no
bijection from R to N).

- one usually refer -> refers
done

- M is a ctm of ZFC, Gödel showed -> ZFC. Gödel showed ...
cambiado ligeramente

- one uses that the => one uses the fact ...
corregido

- to have a meanS -> to have a mean
cambiado (está mal la observación)

- Section 1.2, fixed a preorder P => given a fixed preorder F, ...
Alternativa:
The Rasiowa-Sikorski lemma (RSL) states that for any preorder $\PP$
and any countable family $\mathcal{D}_{n\in\mathbb{N}}$ of dense
subsets of $\PP$ there is a filter intersecting every
$\mathcal{D}_i$.

- Sec 1.2 and aspects=> and the main aspects of ?
cambiado

- Sec2: that is terms => i.e., terms of type
cambiado (sin la coma después de la e)

- to speak of the image [check this sentence]
Alternativa:
As an example, we introduce a new term-former denoting the image of a function
over a set defined by comprehension, namely...

- Sec 2: which defines parameters => that defines the parameters
cambiado

- assumptions necessary => needed
cambiado

- Sec 4: to justify -> in order to justify
cambiado (con un poco de reticencia)

- has to explicit -> has to make explicit
cambiado (explicit NO es un verbo)

- what does it mean "..." after lemma edrel_sub_memrel ? More lemmas
  are needed in between ?
- Some intuitions about the  functions Hv and wfrec are needed.
+ Miguel

- Sec5 of this Section -> section


----------------------- REVIEW 2 ---------------------
PAPER: 10
TITLE: First steps towards a formalization of Forcing
AUTHORS: Emmanuel Gunther, Miguel Pagano and Pedro Sánchez Terraf

Overall evaluation: 1 (weak accept)

----------- Overall evaluation -----------

This paper delineates the first steps towards a formalization of
forcing in Isabelle. The formalization extends Paulson’s Isabelle/ZF
development. The main proved result is the Rasiowa-Sikorski Lemma on
the existence of generic filters. The technique uses preorders over
countable transitive sets for which dense subsets and filters are
specified.  The Rasiowa-Sikorski Lemma states that once a preorder is
fixed, any countable family of dense subsets of it, will have a filter
intersecting all of them, which implies the existence of generic
filters for countable transitive models.

Authors made available the associated development, which is very well
documented, as expected for this kind of formalizations.

The paper is a nice report on interesting work in progress. I suggest
it be accepted for presentation, but I will be much too positive about
its eventual inclusion in the post proceedings if the authors include
additional results such as those pointed out in the conclusion.

Specific comments to the authors

Presentation could be improved if the paper establishes more
precisely, which elements cannot be used directly and why from
Isabelle/ZF. Also, how these elements were adapted. For instance,
Axiom of Choice versus Principle of Dependent Choices is in the end
explained in a very superficial manner in section 3.1 (“it would have
been very contrived to derive DC from the Isabelle/ZF development”). I
suggest you show explicitly how it can be derived to contrast with
your direct adaptation.
+ Pedro se encarga

Also, it is necessary the inclusion of related work on formalizations
of set theory in other proof assistants of course ratifying
inexistence of other formalizations of forcing techniques.
+ Pedro se encarga

Subsections 1.1 and 1.2 might be extended as a background section in
which also, elements available and not available in Isabelle/ZF are
classified by the authors.


Descriptions of sections 3, 4 and 5 could be written in more detail.
+ en cada sección repetir un poco. Se encarga Manu.

Use only P or only Q in Sep_and_Replace Lemma and the associated
discussion. As it is written is not wrong, but using the same symbol
will increase readability.
MIGUEL: cambiado

In general the paper is clear and readable, but in some parts few
errors appear. For instance, abstract: satisfies; SS 1.1: one refers;
conclusion: use “neither depends … nor …”, etc.


----------------------- REVIEW 3 ---------------------
PAPER: 10
TITLE: First steps towards a formalization of Forcing
AUTHORS: Emmanuel Gunther, Miguel Pagano and Pedro Sánchez Terraf

Overall evaluation: 0 (borderline paper)

----------- Overall evaluation -----------
Cohen’s technique of Forcing is an important tool for proving
consistency and independence results in set theory. A formalisation in
an interactive theorem prover of forcing would constitute a
considerable and interesting project. In this paper, the first steps
are presented. Specifically, the authors take Isabelle/ZF as a
starting point and then formalise the definitions of forcing notions
as preorders with top, dense subsets, and generic filters. They then
formalise a version of the principle of Dependent Choice and use that
to formalise the proof of the Rasiowa-Sikorski lemma on the existence
of generic filters.

The paper is generally well-written. I would point out that while the
paper has a friendly introduction from the set-theoretic perspective,
it is lacking is a discussion on the interest in a formalisation in
set theory/forcing, a description of the tools that are used for this
purpose, and details on the formalisation of mathematics in
related/other areas (not just in Isabelle). After all, this is a paper
on the *formalisation of mathematics* (with forcing being the area of
application). This would make the paper more appealing to a reader not
from this community (and also credit the prior work in this field). I
would also like to a see a more precise discussion on what was already
in Isabelle/ZF and what was redeveloped here (and for what
reason). Are you formalising a specific presentation of the forcing? I
did not see this identified in the text.

The main content of this paper (a formalisation of the set-theoretic
and meta-theoretic definitions and some results) is obviously a
pre-requisite to a formalisation of forcing. A concern that I have is
that it is unclear how close the authors are (in terms of time,
effort, technical difficulty) to achieving the full task. In Section 6
the authors do describe the remaining tasks and also the next task,
but it is not clear why a paper is being submitted now, rather than at
the end of the formalisation. Is this paper intended as a 'status
report’ or is it because the completed tasks are already so demanding
that they benefit from being written up? I am sympathetic to the fact
that the set-up of the formalisation is already a challenging task
which necessitates many design decision; nevertheless it is worth
noting that most formalisations require such a set up.

